The most shocking part of this book and of the two year reporting project that went into it was the aid section because everywhere I went.
I saw that aid was not benefiting largely there was small parts of it were benefiting the poor.
But largely was benefiting the richest people in the world the corporations and the local elite the second part of that is that this is not a mistake.
Originally when I first started reporting I was like okay well that they've obviously not thought this out when you start looking at the history of it and you look at how a developed out of full of formal colonialism you realize this has been designed from the start.
Most people understand that corporations have a lot of power too much power over all of our lives often private business interests can subvert democracy and the kinds of governments.
An act in the kinds of policies that people want but that can often be a vague feeling a suspicion.
I guess today has some meat to put on the bones whoever Matt cannot has been a journalist in this field for more than a decade looking at how private business often supersedes and undermines the will of peoples around the world.
Matt cannot welcome to downstream thank you for having me good to be with you but we're very happy to have you back on the bar after many years and we've got you back on to talk about your new book new ish book.
Silent coup how corporations over through democracy that's obviously the theme of a lot of the questions I'm gonna ask today really what's happened to moxie and what's the role of.
Private sector before we go any further tell our audience our viewers our listeners a little bit about yourself why are you an authority on the silent coup.
Good question because my day job is working for the classified UK and we focus on British foreign policy so this is a bit of a departure from that but essentially in 2014.
I started as a fellow at the center for investigative journalism in London and at the same time and another journalist called Claire provost is the co-author of the book she started as a fellow as well.
And she'd left the Guardian to take the fellowship I'd recently left the financial times and we started talking because we had two years of the contract was two years and the guy who gave it to us said.
You don't have to report to me you do what you want and you got a travel budget as well so we start thinking big we thought what are the biggest issues of the day in the world clear been covering aid.
In at the Guardian I've been covering sort of the World Bank and other places in in Washington when I was with the F.T.
And we just it was kind of a meeting of minds and we both kind of agreed that this is the biggest issue of the day in my opinion and hers and I think if you read the book is quite persuasive argument it should be everyone's opinion because what you've seen over the last
particularly since the second world war but this is a battle that's been raging since for four hundred years because that's when the first joint stock up modern joint stock company was invented in England actually.
And what you've seen is corporations have just gradually been trying to get as much power as they can from the state originally corporations were chartered by the crown so it was a privilege to create a corporation it wasn't a right.
Then there was a civil rights battle particularly wage particularly in the 19th century where lots of legislation came into place to unleash the corporation from the state in the UK.
Then later the US and then after the second world war this really went international that was the age of the multinational pretty much in the context of the Bretton Woods institutions which were created in nineteen forty four.
And that was the IMF and the World Bank principally but also later on the general agreement on trade and terrorist gap which became particularly important in sort of greasing the entry of.
Which is now WTO exactly in 1995 it became WTO it originally was gonna be a WTO but it took a long time gap the formation of gap was was a kind of stop gap and what it became was just rounds of talks so you had like a Kennedy round in the sixties where all countries got together and try to reduce tariffs mutually.
It wasn't that successful it wasn't certain rounds were successful the Uruguay round led to the WTO in the nineties.
But anyway so that whole architecture allowed corporations to really go international and the other part of this story which is really a visit to the thesis and I think understanding where we are today is that.
After the second world war formal empires were collapsing at quite a quick clip.
Particularly in the fifties and sixties and the people who have been in power for centuries the imperial powers and their financial sectors.
What's that they were thinking how are we gonna maintain our control of the world where we don't have a formal empire where we can't position garrisons of troops in a foreign place that can just take out a leader if we don't like if they start nationalizing our assets or wherever it was.
And there was quite a lot of conscious policy making at that time to try and create and this sounds like tinfoil hat stuff but it's all there in black and white in the archives of places like the world bank the IMF and other places.
So essentially they wanted to create a supranational system whereby they could bypass rebellious peoples bypass newly liberated countries bypass liberation movements in the developing world.
So they set about about that task in the book it's opens with what is called the investor state dispute settlement system and that is the first project that we started at the center for investing so that again the investor state dispute settlement system is called I SDS and it is.
The conspiracy theory theorist in me thinks that they give these institutions these kind of hard to say names and accurate long acronyms so people just switch off and that is the first reaction you get when you discuss these things but then you start explaining what this is you say okay well this is a shadow legal system whereby multinational corporations can sue states for enacting policies they
don't like which infringe on their quite and quite investor rights and it happens all over the world they're in shrine this system is enshrined in free trade agreements which are a bit of a misnomer because free trade agreement makes you think it's all about mutual lowering of tariffs but actually in embedded in these trade agreements a huge amounts of legal mechanisms whereby corporations can enforce their will.
On the countries that are part of that that agreement one of these is the ISDS system so NAFTA has ISDS provisions in it plenty of other free trade agreements so when the EU makes a trade agreement with the country in sub-Saharan Africa has ISDS and exactly and is the other part of this is what I call bilateral investment treaties or bits and they're all over the world between two countries and they just sort of their regime an investment regime that both countries have to apply abide by but ISDS is enshrined in nearly all of those.
So and is and is enforced so in the case of a corporation that wants to use a bit of BIT for example you can just create a shell company in a in a country that has a BIT with the country you want to sue and just and just see them that way that happens all the time so there's this whole web.
Of treaties agreements which enshrined this ISDS system and what it means effectively away from all the acronyms all the boring stuff is that corporations can sue some of the poorest countries in the world for huge amounts money billions of dollars often.
For for for enacting policies like not allowing the company an environmental permit to dig for gold for example that was one case we looked in our salvo there was one case in Egypt where a French water company sued the Egyptian government for raising the minimum wage.
So anything that a corporation doesn't like that government does they can potentially sue for now you would think that that is a massive attack on democracy and it is because the second part of it is.
It's not just the cases that get to court now these case most of these cases are heard at play school the international set center.
The settlement of investment disputes exit which is part of the world bank so that one again because we can have lots of these the investor limited exit international center.
For the settlement of investment disputes right exit it's an arm of the world bank it was created in 1966 at the height of what I'm talking about the height of the colonization and newly independent governments and what it is is the main venue where these cases are heard by.
It's also a kangaroo court there's so much to get out on this stuff but it's also kangaroo court because it's these decisions are made by three arbitrators.
One appointed by the company one appointed by the government and one agreed on by both these arbitrators have to have no there's no threshold for legal history or any kind of professional attainment but we found that a lot of them have.
Come from the from US administrations there are plenty that came from the Bush administration and other and the Clinton administration so and the decision and it's hugely secretive a lot of the documents you can't get your hands on.
But to go back to my point is that it's not just the cases that I heard it exit and and this wealth transfer to the developer to the corporations that is the major issue.
Regulatory chill and policy making sure is the major issue because if you have this huge infrastructure in place this huge web.
Of economic arrangements whereby multinationals can sue you it means that impacts on your thinking when you're devising policies in your countries and this is we saw this in a very specific way.
In places like Guatemala for example there was a case where we got free to information act documents from the Guatemalan government.
Showing internal deliberations about whether they should grant a might a multinational mining company an environmental permit next to this community and it was gonna be.
Effecting their their their community and their environment you think when a government is delivering whether to grant an environmental permit their main priority would be what impact does this have on our people.
But actually the internal deliberations within the Guatemalan government were about are we gonna get sued by that company if we need that policy they eventually gave them the environmental permit and that happens all over the world this chill this policy making chill and it's by design corporations wanna have an insurance mechanism.
Where they can get their profits and get there the policies they want in place above the heads of national governments.
You also use the example of South Africa yeah which is incredible so you have obviously post apartheid South Africa we've transitioned to democracy.
And in the mid nineteen nineties they're saying and companies which have mining rights in the country obviously it's been a phenomenal producer of gold diamonds etc over the years of Africa.
They're saying twenty six percent of kind of management or ownership needs to be in the hands of black South Africans.
And this is pushed back by Italian investors and so I think this is incredible moment where we're told in the west on our South Africa has transitioned to democratic government but in fact democratic elected government with an overwhelming mandate which what the ANC has in the nineteen nineties and it's basically one party state still is to an extent but with democratic legitimacy they can't do what they want.
Because of this regulatory chill you talk about can you talk about the example of South Africa a little bit yeah I mean this was the craziest case we looked at because we went to South Africa to report.
On the ground from what on what happened in that case and essentially it's like you say after apartheid black empowerment policies were bought in to make just the historical injustices of apartheid one of them was the all companies had to give a.
Percentage of their company to historically disadvantaged people so black people now this Italian company didn't like that and they said we're gonna and we're gonna take you to exit.
And essentially the whole case was kept really quiet by the South African government because they didn't wanna incentivize other companies to do it so it was really under the radar not many people in South Africa knew about this case.
And what happened was there was a settlement out of court where the government the government just want to keep it quiet so they said okay well you don't have to abide by this regulation so this Italian company didn't have to do it.
But afterwards the South African government tried to escape from the system completely and that in itself was interesting because a lot of what.
The systems are about is locking countries into these these systems and allowing no way out so one of the interesting parts of the bilateral investment treaties is that they have things called or they often have things called sunset clauses where even if you cancel them.
You can't that doesn't come in for 10 years by which time that these these people are hoping they'll be a different government doesn't have the same.
Predelection to get to get out it's interesting it's what what Thomas Roman called the he called it the golden straight jacket, but it's obviously not golden but.
But the South Africans were trying at interesting in Latin America the liberation governments of Korea Maduro sorry Chateau is in Venezuela and ever more as they all tried to leave as well during the sort of first pink tide in the 2000s and they found it very difficult as well.
And in fact I went to interview ever more at his house in Bolivia last year and he was talking about this system because he nationalized a lot of companies one of which was a British power company called rural act and rural act took Bolivia to one of these tribunals at this one was actually at the Hague and one tens of millions of.
Pounds from the Bolivian government so it's all over the world it's enshrined in these bilateral investment treaties in the case of South Africa another interesting part of it is we were talking to people that have been in the government at that time post apartheid.
And it said that actually these bilateral investment treaties were just presented as a bit of diplomatic goodwill so Mandela would go to Belgium.
And they'd say OK welcome back into the fold you're being reintegrated into into the global economy let's just sign this nice bit of paper this is what happened.
And then 1015 years later they get hit with all these suits that they didn't even know where it was possible to activate through these agreements and that's often how it how it's done it's a hugely secretive.
And.
Quietly done system which is why people like you who know you know about economics you know about these things a lot of the people.
Who I explained this to this sort of like why do I not know about this and I think that's by design they don't want people to talk about it.
But if you talk to governments that are trying to go against corporate rule within their own countries but also also internationally they all know about it.
Yeah so that's why ever Morales was talking about it when I was asking about corporate power because for him it was an extremely powerful way that corporations could override his decisions.
There are enforcement mechanisms that it's not like you can just say OK we're not going to listen to you if arbitration if they could if you're called to an arbitration you don't recognize it they can start taking your assets internationally.
There's a lot of ways of enforcing this system on developing countries so it's not like somewhere it's not like domestically where you could just used to be able to nationalize something and then you could.
You should pay compensation but you that would be negotiated this is like this international court would decide and you have to pay otherwise we'll start stripping you.
So what what I mean you sort of you alluded to it there but what would happen if they didn't pay so let's say Bolivia takes mining company owned by the US away from them court says no you need to.
They take it in public ownership and the court said this is quite reasonable one right rather than the case of the Italians in South Africa which is completely unacceptable I think.
They say no you have to give it back to them and they say no they find them a couple hundred million dollars they say well we don't recognize this court or this fine what happens then.
Well there's there's that there's actual legal systems in place where they can they can take your assets internationally so if you have.
Any kind of government assets in foreign countries they can be taken if you have boats in international waters they can be taken becomes illegal matter but also.
You can be massively punished by the Bretton Woods institutions themselves because it is part of the World Bank but also so the IMF.
They can they can do really punitive things that mean that you basically can't function your credit lines will be pulled you won't be able to get liquidity if you need it in the time of crisis all these all these things.
All these things that make someone like everyone else who you who you would not expect to abide by a system that he doesn't think is just.
He abided by and they did pay it and there were negotiations that the company really didn't get the fee that they wanted but they got millions and interestingly.
For while we were working on this I actually sent a freedom of information that request to the British government.
About the role that case to get emails between the embassy in London during this case and it showed that the.
The embassy in Bolivia will lobbying on behalf of the relay which actually is is unlawful because governments are not meant to be involved in these.
In these investor state dispute settlement systems and there was one there's one email that was headlined lobby on rural that was a British embassy email.
Like all these things nothing ever happened because they just ignored our article.
Well so this again the British embassy.
Yeah in Bolivia was lobbying on the behalf of a private company.
In it who was in a dispute with the Bolivian government.
It's not it's not it's not lawful and it's the exit system and the investor state dispute settlement system is meant to be outside of state.
Control and outside of state influence but in this case it wasn't and it was extremely obvious.
I mean it was interesting that they released that email to me because I think they probably just didn't know that they weren't allowed to lobby because.
A lot of their part of their job is to lobby for business.
Most journalists don't cover this stuff right.
They don't even know if it's legal or not and even if it is illegal who the hell's going to talk about it exactly.
If it's not Matt Kennard or somebody at Navarra media or you know.
I mean can I just say one more really messed up part of this which is for me is kind of maybe the most messed up part is that there's been a whole industry now created around this investor state dispute settlement system called third party financing.
Which is whereby there are boutique financial firms now which their sole purpose is to lend money to.
Corporations who are suing states and those those claims against states are the collateral that they give the loan to and they say will give you millions.
To it to pay for the legal fees or whatever it is actually it's not only just to pay for the cost of the case is to set you to expand in the case of rural like they were they were funded by a third party finance and the five party finance said we.
We will help rural like expand but what they what the deal is that if they if they if they win the case against the state these companies these are financial companies get a cut of that award.
And we're talking about sometimes billions as I said Occidental Petroleum a case against Exidor which was quite famous they got billions of dollars there's a case now against Honduras.
Which whereby they denied a company.
The right to build a special economic zone in Honduras and they're getting sued for eleven billion dollars Honduras tiny little country in Central America being sued because they won't build a special economic zone.
By the company I think I don't know the specifics but I think they'd probably come to some agreement or that they've left a million dollars yeah but the other point of this is you said that okay maybe the rural case there's a case for getting compensation okay that's true but.
Part of capitalism is rests on the fact that you take a risk when you invest right course and the higher the risk the bigger the return so if you go to Congo.
And you go in you want to get a diamond mine or whatever it is then you might get you might get expropriated but that's what part that's why you go there because you the potential for huge rewards this ensures you against that it's a massive insurance mechanism whereby corporations.
The whole of capitalism and it's totally it's capitalist model and the funny thing about the ISDS system is you know when you talk to people on the inside about all these different.
Systems that the benefit corporate power around the world most of them have quite a sophisticated and persuasive ideology built up on top of them to justify them to.
The general public but also to the people working in within them.
In this case of the ISDS system is barely anything like even talking to people that people say the one thing they say is this is about increasing investment to developing well because corporations are going to be much less scared to go and invest in a developing world.
If they can be sure that they'll get compensated if bad things happen to them.
But that doesn't make that just doesn't hold up because Brazil is one country which is never which never signed up to exit and there's never been hit with one of these cases because it doesn't include them in it in their different agreements.
Has Brazil ever had a problem with foreign direct investment.
I don't think so.
There's no colliery colliery.
So yeah it is a naked attempt to ensure companies against risk and a naked attempt to allow corporations to go over the heads of national governments and it's not a coincidence that was created in 1966.
Because that was the 60s was really the time when large parts of Africa Asia were really becoming free of the imperial powers.
The winds of change exactly as Wilson said yeah.
So and they will they thought well we can't have that we got to create a system whereby we can maintain that imperial control and maintain the control of the investors maintain the control of the corporations without having to have formal garrisons of troops or whatever it is.
In those countries and they did it successful.
Two thousand twenty three it has taken off its it's gone wild because what we saw we sort of did analysis of how many cases there had been since it was created in 1966 and it picked up massively after the end of the cold war because.
It was resurgent rampant capitalism there was no other poll for countries to organize around so they had to be integrated into the system they had there was nowhere else they could go.
And Eastern Europe with the ISDS was a massive part of all the agreements that they that they signed so I mean part of the rest of the rest of the book is also about this system of the countries that come out of the cold are integrated into but this is a major part of it.
I mean we can go on to some of the others now.
You said about Honduras a moment ago so I had to check Honduras is GDP is GDP is twenty nine billion dollars so eleven billion dollars is quite a lot.
You know the UK GDP is about three trillion two point eight trillion dollars so you're looking at almost half of that economic output in a year.
What you're describing with these with these agreements is like you say just a clarification on my part.
There's an insulation from any downside whatsoever and like you say normally there is risk with capital if you go and invest in an ISA or a pension you will be told quite explicitly.
You're not guaranteed to return here you may even lose your initial investment but what we have here is basically.
The equivalent of you can go and open a shop on the high street and even if nobody turns up even if you don't sell anything you can't lose money don't worry.
And that isn't that isn't what capitalism is meant to be and I'm not defending capitalism or attacking capitalism but that's merely a description of this system here.
What you're describing really is a complete and that obviously is thread runs throughout the book is really a complete subversion of democracy and it is interesting for me in this country people have talked about taking back control.
And it seems very obvious that for much the global south and it should be said a lot of the global north to me just mentioned Eastern Europe.
But other places as well as we'll go on to discuss.
Democracy is a mirage it doesn't exist with this stuff and often you would have heard over the last couple of decades particularly since early 2000s with the protests against WTO and so on we have neocolonialism but it sounds to me you're just describing colonialism.
Yeah so what is it is it neocolonialism doesn't sound there's anything particularly neo about it.
Yeah well there's this whole school of thought called post-colonialism I just don't I don't see it.
I think that it's the same dynamics but altered for a new reality so they had to abide by the newly independent and peoples and the new liberation movements which which took off after the second war they would have liked not to do that but they had to adjust for a new reality and they did and they did it.
Undercover I mean no one knows about this ISDS system no one knows about the reality of aid which is another major strand talk about that yeah hold your fire no one but but but literally.
The left and the right the left's maybe worse than right in terms of misunderstanding what aid is but that they they not only adjusted they repackaged it as saying we're helping the developing world and we're helping you to develop.
And you see that across the board and what's quite interesting is obviously when you look at the archives which we did and you look at the internal deliberations it's the opposite they're talking quite consciously about.
Inshrining and maintaining their control it's just that the public posture was about.
All these wonderful things that we wanted to give people and that was and this is a major another part of this corporate coup is that it is huge part of it is is about.
What that what is called corporate social responsibility which is propaganda propaganda it's about presenting this corporate system.
And it's corporate colonialism as a wonderful benefit for the rest of humanity now I covered the mining industry at the financial times for a year.
And it was amazing it's I went to one of the mining conferences in.
In South Africa and all these presentations by mining companies and it was you barely know that these mining companies were digging for gold or anything nearly 90% of what they talked about was all the wonderful things that they were bringing to the local communities it would just be slides of schools and hospitals and all this stuff it was.
It sounds like I'm exaggerating but I'm not it was literally like I was just in like a Oxfam international conference or something but that is that was a really really.
Conscious decision by the corporate sector particularly mining in the 90s because they were having trouble with what they called a social license.
They were it was operations on the ground were becoming more and more difficult because their reputation was so bad and people didn't wanted to kick them out so they thought we're gonna have to get that social license back so they launched this huge corporate social responsibility.
Thing but that's all what that's also what happened after the second world war with development the word development they said that they started saying well we want the world to develop we want you poor people have to develop.
And it has to be a but what does development mean it's export orientated growth has to be that you don't exist for these institutions if you're a subsistence farmer and you've been doing it for a thousand years doesn't matter what you only exist if you are producing.
Produce for the market so they really re orientated all these economies in the name of development to benefit the benefit that the global market to benefit the benefit these companies and the system but yeah it's a it's a massive.
It's a massive illusion that the post colonialism ever happened we live in the midst of it.
So I think lots of people instinctively will they want all these facts and details now that's really interesting but they said that kind of tallies with what I.
I suspected let's get into the nuts and bolts of this because you say a lot of this happens in the crucible of the sort of the end of colonialism one point oh.
Obviously the British Empire really is collapsing in the fifties and sixties I mean really after the mid 1950s.
And it's around this time we hear about a guy called Herman Yosef ABS German banker.
Can you explain who he is and why he's important.
Yeah he's a very.
I think I don't know now in Germany but at the time he was a very prominent figure in Germany and in in 1957 he went to.
A conference of industrialists in San Francisco and presented a proposal for what I'm talking about what I talked about which is this investor state dispute settlement system it wasn't called that then but what he said was we need to.
Ensure that essentially this sounds over the top but essentially people don't have control of their own resources because it's a problem for us and he referenced things like the the coup in Iran in 1953.
The following year which was done by MI6 and CIA because the Democratic Prime Minister had nationalized the Anglo-Iranian oil company.
Just for our audience is the man called Mossadegh.
Mossadegh yeah he was taken out in a joint CIA MI6 coup Iran's never been a democracy again.
He was a moderate I mean it was it was part of this Cold War thing of trying to.
He's probably centre right actually you know like yeah but he was called National Front.
The red line for these people was you can't you can't have use your resources for your own people he wanted to give a little higher percentage to.
The Iranian state therefore the Iranian people at the detriment to the detriment of the British investors not allowed.
Following year CIA takes out the Social Democratic President of Guatemala in 1954.
At the behest of the United Fruit Company because again Arbenz the president had had the temerity to say that maybe we could distribute a little bit of fallow land back to some peasants not allowed will take you out.
Suez crisis nine fifty six NASA nationalizes the Suez Canal in UK France Israel invade.
Again so he's referencing all these things he's saying look we don't want to have to have a system where we have to go in hard like this.
We need a system that works above these people's heads so it doesn't matter if these people get in power they have no power anyway.
The investor state dispute settlement system is a major part of that.
But another part of it is we could move on to this is is is aid and creating global economies that rely and are based around attracting investment.
Sorry shall I go on in a minute or do you want to come back on that.
I like this style you have like sorry don't need to say sorry Matt.
Well I just want to stick with Herman Yosef Abbs for a second because this is the world that we live in right we think of a 21st century capitalism and so on.
But Yosef Abbs is working for Deutsche Bank in the late 1930s right under the Third Reich and that is the world that we still live in very much colonial powers the idea of white supremacy European hegemony markets and us making profits here in Europe and North America.
Matter far more than people in Africa and South America and Asia.
And I think it's really important to name names I mean you've got him there's a few others too and I suppose what will will turn to those but it's it's still very much their world and this idea of.
You write about a Magna Carta moment for global capitalism inherently tied to ideas of pre-war colonialism like there's just such a clear continuation.
Let's talk about aid because that is something that our audience probably thinks okay it's got some downsides but it's generally good why are you not such a fan of overseas development aid.
Well put it like this okay this is why we say to people because I think that there's no topic that the left gets more wrong than aid David Cameron not known as a great.
Advocate for the poor is he in 2010 the austerity government that he began then with George George Osborne was what created one of the worst crisis for the British poor for generations.
At the same time he went on TV and was talking up how he was dedicating 0.7% of GDP to aid.
Now how do you square those two things why does he why is he hammering the poor here to the point where I don't know what I can't remember what the status I think it's caught for a million people that they or a hundred thousand people that might have died because of austerity.
We think at least 150,000 excess deaths yeah excess deaths but yeah he's while he's doing that and enacting those policies he's he's promising that will give maintain a certain level of GDP towards aid for foreigners it's not because.
He cares about the point of developing world is because aid is a massive subsidy to his friends in the corporate sector and is a massive tool for geopolitical control as well that's the other thing because a lot of the work I do with the classified actually is about aid programs.
So for example I've done.
Did one recently about how British aid had been used to set up an anti government coalition in Venezuela or about how aid had been used to try to persuade Bolsonaro's Brazil to privatize oil and gas.
It's just that there's one organization particularly called the conflict stability and security fund which I'd say tell people to look into again and another acronym and another long name that sounds boring but again it's just a massive slush fund.
For the state to enact its geopolitical control that's one element of it the other element of it is the.
Subsidies corporate corporations and you see this all across the board there's one institution which we focus on particularly which is emblematic of this system a system which is the international finance corporation again another arm of the world bank again created in this in the context of these newly independent countries in 1956.
In this case and the idea was.
To invest in private companies so the World Bank before had been it was about transfer of capital to governments and this was about how in the name of development and then it's a stated goal of.
Alleviating global poverty they would invest in private corporations the argument being that they'd invest in corporations that would otherwise not want to go to certain places.
But I spent years looking at the IFC eventually and went to countless countries and it's an absolute.
Joke racket from Miami also known as Burma we went we went there to report on the IFC I'll just give you this one example and the IFC had invested this is a.
One of the poorest countries have ever been to dirt poor I think the fewest doctors a person in the world maybe and then they'd poured capital into this five star hotel.
Built by this Malaysian oligarch and you sort of see went from the street we went to the hotel.
Poor people everywhere people real sort of destitution and then you'd walk through these doors and it's just this air conditioned beautiful hotel with like huge buffet.
All these men and women in suit all these men in suits and it and that is that it that was copied around the world wherever I went I went to a diamond mine in Tanzania.
There's lots of good stories here so slow down yeah the one that really caught my imagination was that we the British taxpayer were paying for gated communities.
Which I just found so mad we're paying for social and economic apartheid in the third world or developing countries in the name of development.
And I found myself this is the thing that should the left is quite bad on this I read that I read a few other things too so it's all about separate things here the World Bank and what it does let's put a pin in that for a moment and what you know the British government does with its own overseas aid.
I read that thing about the British overseas aid and I felt my inner forage come out you know just scrap international aid.
And I think if you tell most people that our international aid is just a scam to a significant extent not all of it.
They sort of look at you rather strangely but the reality is of course we should be spending money on reproductive rights contraception clean drinking water education programs of course but that's not the majority of aid is it.
Like you say there is a segment of it and I know people in the industry and there's really good people that work in it and the bit that is really important is disaster relief so for example when I worked for the Financial Times they sent me to Haiti after the earthquake.
And organizations like Oxfam and which is funded by the UK government and lots of other groups were doing vital work to keep people alive you know this is like it was apocalypse there.
But that's actually quite a small section of it and the real money is going towards subsidizing corporations and it's a massive asset revenue stream for them.
So much money is being pumped into it and barely anyone is covering it.
The other the other part of this as well is that I mentioned Oxfam I should talk a bit about how corporations have colonized civil society as well particularly in aid.
One example which was pretty shocking for me at the time I'm not shocked by this kind of stuff now but we went to El Salvador in 2000 2016 I think it was and we did a story about this poor community that lived on top of an aquifer.
And they couldn't afford the water that they were sitting on because the prices were too high yet down the road there were all these multinationals bottling drinks like Coke and Fanta that we drink here.
So we did this story for the guardian and so I contacted Sab Miller which is one of the companies that bottles Coke and said look we've talked to all these poor people that they're really struggling and you're getting and you're bottling these drinks down the road.
They said they said they got really angry with me one of the most aggressive PR teams I've ever dealt with and then they said look read this report that we that we authored with Oxfam.
So I sort of thought okay and then they sent me this report which had the Sab Miller and Oxfam's logo on the same thing which was basically exculpating them of any any problems and any crimes in in in that area.
So I kind of put up some resistance to it but I think most journalists receiving that would see the sort of logo of Oxfam and think okay well if Oxfam is saying they're right and then they are right but that's but that happens all the time.
What is Oxfam saying that what Oxfam most people in Oxfam don't enter that game to provide a cloak fundamentally for multinationals destroying people's lives in the global south so how has that happened.
Well because of the budget problems and also it's just a it's a function of the same dynamic that we've talked about corporations have invested every part of our society that's basically zero parts of our society that have escaped corporate power because they have all the money.
And they've used these corporations to to sort of a version of greenwashing obviously it's not about the environment although that also exists but.
With aid organizations and humanitarian organizations it gives them the perfect foil to do whatever they want and in the case of Oxfam it gets worse this story by the way so we publish the story eventually.
And it's quite hard hitting story goes on for the Guardian so obviously goes under the Gates Foundation logo so then you see that that happens.
And the Gates Foundation is not a benign institution is part of this whole system is it's got a very particular way of looking at development which is.
It's the godfather of this whole system it's the don't call the only of this whole system.
Exactly but and then so and then two days after that there's an there's a article in the Guardian on the development side with the Bill Gates logo which is a 900 word interview with the Latin American division head of Sam Miller.
Wow basically talking about our article not by not naming it but defending Sam Miller's record in El Salvador.
Yeah well saying that water stress is what these corporations also always do they say it's about corruption you know these sort of words they use to blame the victim rather than them and then one more thing.
And so then I see then I start doing a bit of research and I see that Sam Miller funds part of the Guardian's website.
So they so I don't I don't know if Sam Miller called up and said we found part of your website but but so we want to we want to write a reply.
But also that was my question do you think because obviously there is a right there's but there's a right to editorial rights giving somebody the right to reply you should do that if they've made your misgivings.
It wasn't presented like that.
No it was presented as just it happened to be they've happened to publish this interview it wasn't even so it wasn't an advertorial it wasn't a right of reply it was just a.
Will interview this person about water stress in Latin America happened to be two days after we published this article so so they've infested the NGOs they've infested.
The media because obviously the progressive press.
The progressive press is often worse like in terms of I don't know if you've seen recently I saw some.
Navarra journalist tweeting about the new statesman and BAE systems yes there's a whole section but it in some ways the Guardian and the and the new statesman are worse than the right wing media in terms of doing this doing the bidding of corporations.
But yeah so it's a panorama where they've just taken over it's very very few spaces now where you can have an independent.
Right do give me a given opinion independent of media power where I'm sorry of corporate power that being a media.
Universities whatever it is.
Hold on it's not an opinion even you were reporting facts that's true.
You're reporting facts and if you report facts all of a sudden some miller can place a interview within 48 hours I mean that's mad I know and also if you think about that what that means in reality that is the Guardian has given the last word.
To one of the richest corporations in the world we're doing awful things there over the voices of some of the poorest people in the world that we'd originally platformed and that was how it ended.
And this happens all the time the point is I wasn't working for the Guardian then and also I didn't really care about pissing them off by publicizing it so I did publicize it at the time but I think most people just would they wouldn't even.
They wouldn't even look at it or they wouldn't even realize it happened they wouldn't do the research to see all these different pressure points which had been activated.
Or if you did bring it up Matt frankly it's career suicide.
Let's be honest there's a reason why.
Might sound like it's cope from me but there's a reason why people like you and me appear don't really appear on the BBC definitely.
Sky generally I mean I got I only get a call from BBC or sky so they can attack me for something yeah I mean I've got to defend somebody.
They don't say what's your view on XYZ and there's a reason for that because when you're honest about this stuff it's it's it's not really good for you know getting you up the greasy pole.
You're saying about the media do you think it's got worse with this stuff because I'm from the Guardian I don't stick on the Guardian too much but it's really interesting because we don't have many progressive print publications in this country it's one of them.
And it feels to me like 15 20 years ago it was substantially better on this stuff and now it's a lot worse do you think that's right.
I think it is across the board is not just corporations is also its coverage of the security state for example which is what I cover day to day that's just been completely jettisoned any kind of critical coverage of the military or intelligence agencies.
It doubles up with the corporate corporations but I think that you've seen.
These interests really ramp up their attacks on independent spaces so the Guardian as you say actually 20 years ago was actually not bad like it wasn't perfect far from it but it had space for Maverick reporters people doing truthful independent reporting regularly yeah.
And that's been completely lost and I think that part of it is that a lot of stuff in terms of the corporations for example when they sign I remember when it was sort of the advent of this corporate takeover of the Guardian.
The Guardian would always say when they started doing these sites into in an alliance with the corporations well we signed contracts where the corporations say they have no say over our editorial line or and I think that's probably true.
But that's the react that that's the direct relationship when you've been 20 years later when you've got like dozens of companies just all over just with their logo all over your website has a.
It has an effect on a sort of more general level it's not and it's not conscious it's not like they're saying do this do that it's just because you know those logos are there you know you work within a new framework.
So that that that power is felt in a much more insidious way and I think that's how it's worked I think that's also how it worked with the security state as well because.
I mean actually in the case of the security state with the gun is quite interesting like in the aftermath of the Snowden revelations we looked at the D notice committee meetings which for viewers the D notice committee is this.
Media censorship organization run by the Ministry of Defense and they meet every six months at the M.O.D. with a small collection of journalists and basically discuss about what they can and can't publish.
The Guardian which very British self censorship right.
It's not like you know Stalin was like you can't write in America I've talked to some American jealous about they just think.
I mean American journalism is far from perfect but they literally can't understand how we put up with that they say you meet with the state and in his formal way like people do it but behind closed doors you know it's kind of embarrassing.
But anyway so the those D notice committee meeting showed that during the Snowden revelations they were the intelligence apparatus.
And the M.O.D. were freaking out big time because they were ignoring the notices which were being sent out the Guardian were and then nice to cut a long story short.
Russ Bridger who was editor at the time agreed to add the deputy editor Paul Johnson to the D notice committee and he joined.
So that was about bringing them in house you know about cultivating them and then soon after that the first ever interview of a sitting head of M.I. five was granted to the Guardian.
Soon after that the first interview of the sitting head of M.I. six was granted to the Guardian so you can we did it in the first article we did for declassified myself and Mark Curtis.
We kind of delineated how this had happened.
And I think that it's the same corporations independent spaces are a real threat especially ones with resources because the Guardian not only had the predilection to expose the security state and corporations but it also had the resources.
It's a big newspaper global newspaper with a good reputation when you got those two things combined it's a threat to these power's interests so they had to take them take them down and essentially as a critical.
Sort of independent media outlet it doesn't exist anymore in my opinion.
They barely do stories that the of the caliber that they used to do at all and it's kind of just become a bit of a tabloid the uninteresting newspaper in my opinion.
There's also a broader point here let's just stick with the media for a moment about how for most of the last century.
Broadly anybody with capital obviously it tends to be wealthier people but it could be a trade union as well right or the Scott trust in the case of the Guardian.
If you have lots of money you can start a newspaper and it can wash its own face through selling copies of that newspaper if it can find a market the market mechanism would pay for news.
Clearly in the last couple of decades that stopped because of the internet.
Now it still applies to some things monthly publications or weekly papers or whatever New York Times is doing great with its 10 million online subscribers but generally speaking I do have a daily newspaper with the market mechanisms kind of disappeared.
And what that means now is that news outlets are generally owned by Dr. Rich where that's Bezos with the Washington Post you know would they have done Watergate with Bezos in charge.
Right or the observer in the 1980s showing that actually the BBC going back for decades have been vetting thousands of people to see their speed see their political connections fundamentally if you were going to be going to be anybody in the BBC.
Right the way from its beginning right the way through to the late 1980s probably still what we don't know you were basically vetted and if you would you know if you're strong left wing connections.
No you wouldn't get senior jobs that was that was that was exposed by the observer you have the story about the Israeli nuclear weapons program okay the paper was owned by Murdoch.
But the point was that these papers were trying to sell news they were trying to make money and I think we're in a world now where I don't think legacy journalism does that anymore.
I genuinely think when Adam and my legacy journalism does basically basically does PR.
I agree and we're in a really new world but don't you think it's very strange that that dynamic has has taken place at the same time as the media has opened up and democratized you would have thought the opposite pressure would be so the fact that.
So the fact that Navarra exists or declassified we couldn't have existed 20 years ago but so the media's been massively democratized by the internet by social media.
So you would have thought that the pressure that would put on the legacy media was that they had to open up because otherwise they're going to get outflanked but actually they become more and more closed and more and more establishment friendly while.
Alternative media what's called alternative media is blossomed I can't get my head around why that is but I totally agree with you I think that.
The mainstream media is something very insidious and sinister has happened to it in the last 20 years because even if you remember during the war in Iraq.
Like what the media was like the guard the mirror under Piers Morgan who is a controversial figure but he it was incredible I remember that there were.
I bought it every day during that build up to the war in Iraq where he had the headlines were made out of oil companies logos or pictures of George Bush and Tony blow blood all over their hands stuff you would never ever see now.
No I actually think that there was a concerted effort by the state to make sure that never happened again because it was the media opposition and the mainstream media opposition to Iraq was a real problem for them executing that war.
And probably stopped any movement on to Iran.
The subsequent people said oh well the war happened anyway yeah but we never went to Iran in under a milliband labor refused to bomb Syria etc you can agree or disagree with those decisions but the point is they didn't happen and I think the trajectory.
Was diverted because of like say media intervention I think hostility from the public which to an extent was reflected in the media and now it isn't and it is weird now we're in the early 2020s all the media talks about and I know some of our viewers and our listeners care about this stuff.
It talks about cake it talks about speeding finds like and of course that stuff matters of course it matters it doesn't matter half as much as the stories you're talking about and they're not being relayed in legacy media for a reason.
So let's put a pin in the media conversation because we could talk about that all day people who are listening watching.
Remember 20 minutes ago as I mentioned the fact that the British overseas development aid budget was investing in gated communities believe in El Salvador.
I mean this really underscores an important point doesn't it that you know we had NGOs people at the Guardian quite and quite progressive saying we have to spend 0.7% of GDP on overseas aid.
But it's about what you're spending where and who benefits rather than the amount of money like I don't want to be giving money to gated communities in El Salvador I would rather that number be lower I would like it to be zero.
Yeah yeah I mean I think if people understood where where aid money was going the whole budget would be stopped tomorrow because the right the interesting thing about aid is that the right is very critical of it and if you read the Daily Mail there was they launched campaigns to get the.
But their perception of aid and their analysis of aid is extremely thin and the major arguments that I've been making that should be made by the left are just non existent you can't hear them in the in the media at all partly because the place that you would normally hear them would be the Guardian or you expect to hear them but the whole of its development website is funded by the Gates Foundation.
So to go back to the gated communities in El Salvador one of the interesting facets of this whole thing is that.
The system that is being erected around the world and has been erected which is corporate rule has created an extremely divided society here but also around the world everywhere you go there's huge levels of inequality so you now have a class of people in all these places that need to.
Fence himself off from the rest of society to fence themselves off from the results of this system so yes El Salvador.
Is a is an extremely poor country we went there in our reporting but it's got little oasis of of huge wealth and that's where the British money is going because they think that there needs to be places for.
The rich to live because that's part of their development model for example in another example was my and my and the five star hotel which they were funding we talked to the head of the IFC which is the private sector lending arm of the world bank when we were in my and my we said.
You at least justify why you're spending aid money on on a five star hotel and he said well look.
The opening up to the rest of the world they need when a businessman goes to my and my he needs a place he's gonna feel comfortable to stay.
So you can make go negotiate with people to do business deals and that's their argument they don't like and it makes sense I guess on some level but when you look at a society like my and my problems it has the scale of the problems.
The last thing that you you would you'd locate as a thing that they needed was a five star hotel for rich people to go and invest in fact what they need is a development model that does not rely solely on the vagaries of internet of foreign direct investment which is what they're building.
That I mean for me that the most shocking part of this book and the two year reporting project that went into it was the aid section because everywhere I went.
I saw that aid was not benefiting largely there was small parts of it that were benefiting the poor.
But largely was benefiting the richest people in the world the corporations and the local elite and secondly the second part of that is that this is not a mistake.
Originally when I first started reporting I was like okay well that they've obviously not thought this out.
But when you start looking at the history of it and you look at how a developed out of full of formal colonialism you realize this is all the design this is been designed from the start.
This is the plan this is the plan the IFC for example the but the institution which I looked at most and which I've described the arm of the World Bank which was created in 1956.
We went to the World Bank archives in Washington DC and we looked at what the discussions were about why they were creating the IFC and it was explicitly talked about as a arm of the.
A tool in the Cold War they wanted to expand capitalism in places which were which could fall to communism so the best way to do that is to make the private sector as big as possible right.
So they'd say we need this corporation to go in and but now the IFC is an investment bank people on the we talked to people on the inside who anonymously.
And they said the IFC effectively functions as an investment bank and it's a money earner for the World Bank group as well so it's been completely perverted from any kind of development goal.
A few points so I think most people that when they hear the words international development they think kids getting books at school like I said clean drinking water maybe an infrastructure project right a road.
But they wouldn't hear in their mind.
Yeah five-star hotel where businessmen can have a cup of coffee and make a business man fucking ridiculous frankly but like you say hey it goes I think hand in hand with an idea that the more privatization the more inequality the better.
And I think as an appendage to that like the continuation with with colonialism.
With regards to sorry I'm coming back here so I had a really interesting question for you.
We're gonna talk about the diamond mine that's it.
And I suppose as an outgrowth of that as well I mean you said that a lot of this is based upon anti-communism and our position of communism during the Cold War.
At the end of the 1950s so you got Mossadegh Arbenz and Guatemala.
And NASA in Egypt and these guys weren't particularly left wing but.
I mean actually Arbenz basically just a social democrat but the point is social democracy outside of the West wasn't allowed.
But it wasn't just communism's what I mean it was very much a concern that global South countries would have nationalism.
Right this force which is apparently so normal in the West you're allowed to be a nationalist in the UK or France the US.
But the minute you have a nationalism from a third world country it was just that we cannot have that so I think for an audience as well just to because they might say well good anti-communism well no this is fundamentally about creating obstacles to.
Nationalism and to the idea of.
You know popular sovereignty and again there's something actually I think the left's been very weak on you know the left says all nationalism is bad well actually nationalism has created an incredible.
Countervailing force against oppression against imperialism for the majority of the world over the last hundred years so maybe don't phrase things like that.
You mentioned the World Bank I mean wow some of the stories about the World Bank just and this idea of it being an investment fund.
Can you touch upon one project in particular in Tanzania.
Yeah this was a day.
The other bizarre part of this whole system is you would expect a diamond mine.
To.
If it was owned by a major company like the beers they would have they would not need like non-commercial loans at favorable rates from a development institution to expand you would have thought that they were integrated enough into the world of finance that they could get the the loans that they wanted.
But essentially in this in this case.
This diamond mine.
Which is now owned by Petra Diamonds which is listed in London said that they hadn't made a profit in like 10 or 15 years which again I was dubious of because it's very nice to say that if you're in Tanzania whose.
HMRC is probably like five or six guys in a room and you've got like all these powerful accountants that can do.
Interesting accounting to make sure you don't get a profit that you have to pay a tax on.
I'm not saying that's what they did but.
That that is a massive power imbalance that you see around the world where you have the corporate accountants and it's not HMRC in this country right.
I mean that's I don't think anybody would dispute that Tanzania's ability to collect tax is quite limited.
Exactly.
But anyway they said they hadn't so they they they took money from the World Bank and the IFC to develop this diamond mine.
And I went along there and again it's like so much of this new geography corporate geography around the world where.
You go to a place that Tanzania which is not one of the poorest African countries but is pretty poor when you go there.
And you arrive at so you're seeing all this sort of poverty around and then you arrive at this it's a campus that this this diamond mine is not just a mine it's got like a hospital and school.
And you go through the metal gates and and it's just like perfectly tarmac roads hospital that works school.
People like looking happy and and that's what and so you go there then you get taken by PR person around and they're telling you all the wonderful things.
But the funny thing is that when I interviewed the finance person at that mine he said to me we didn't need the IFCs and non-commercial loans we could have easily done it without.
But we liked having the imprimatur of the World Bank on our company.
It was good for our respectability.
It was good for our legitimacy.
We'd be exploiting people the World Bank's helping us.
Exactly.
And and and then add that to the fact it's a diamond mine.
So how does that benefit development?
It's a private diamond diamond mine hasn't paid tax in over a decade.
And the World Bank's argument is well it creates jobs and it develops the hamlets around the campus.
So part of the whole propaganda tour I was taken on was I was taken to a local school which had been built by company.
It was like 50 kids packed into a little like brick brick school tiny brick school.
And then I interviewed some some of the teachers and they actually were quite outspoken to me.
They said well they might have built us this but they didn't like where's the where's the money for the central government.
They were aware of what I'm talking about which is that they they avoid all this paying any tax to the central government and then act like they're the saviors of the local community by building these.
Pretty threadbare schools.
And that is kind of what we saw all around the world that the arguments are so thin for why they're investing in these these these high end capitalist exploration endeavors like a diamond mine or a five star hotel.
It's all about creating jobs for the local local community.
Why can't you create a job for the local community by by building something that's socially useful for for poor people.
If it was publicly owned or at least if the state even if the state just has a 30 percent share.
Let's have a compromise here like there's still the jobs.
Yeah but this is a very important point that you bring up about the IFC because the IFC doesn't just invest in private corporations to go into new markets.
They have an advisory arm which is advising governments to privatize everything.
And it's a famous case where they got the the the main hospital in the suit to private Oxfam did a whole report about this.
The IFC helped the suit to privatize their hospital their main hospital.
And then it started eating up like huge amounts of their health budget per year extraordinary sums.
And that is kind of replicated around the world.
They're advising governments to privatize certain things and then investing in companies that might benefit from those privatizations.
It's a conflict of interest.
Clearly right.
I mean that's clear as day as well with the World Bank.
This was another one Matt.
It just my jaw dropped.
Right.
And I'm quite.
I'm sure people who are familiar with the war and I'm quite skeptical of many things and a bit of a cynic even.
But this idea that the World Bank invests to an extraordinary extent in companies registered in tax domains where they'll pay less tax.
So for instance companies which are operating in Africa but they'll be domiciled and somewhere like the Mauritius because it's really a tax haven.
Now I'm not saying they're evading tax but it's legal tax avoidance.
And I find it incredible that the World Bank's development model would accept the possibility.
We're helping a country develop by investing in a business which is in tax haven.
Can you explain that to me at least?
Well we went to Mauritius actually because Mauritius is kind of an emblematic example of this whole system as well because when it achieved independence it was written off as kind of a basket case.
It had no real resources or obvious way to develop out of the poverty that was in.
And then it was the World Bank promote this whole idea of it becoming a tax haven.
And now when you go there there's a huge financial district, insurance companies, all these international companies there.
And we were looking at a company called Malawi Mangos which is registered in Mauritius and we tried to get their accounts.
You can't get their accounts in Mauritius because another part of this is that tax havens are secrecy jurisdictions.
So we couldn't get any, even when we were in Mauritius we went to their company's house and we couldn't get any details.
But the IFC had invested in Malawi Mangos.
Which is meant to be dealing with Malawi.
Yeah exactly.
But they're registered in Mauritius.
And yeah I mean to be honest with you, I think that the World Bank don't care because it's part of the whole model that they're promoting.
They are promoting a corporate agenda and their whole model is rests on the fact that the only way the world can develop is by attracting foreign direct investment and attracting foreign corporations to go and invest there.
Now if you believe that's the whole of the riddle of development, then tax havens are a benefit because they help corporations and anything that's good for corporations is good for development because there's no other way to develop.
And I think that's what they think.
I mean they wouldn't say that publicly, they would say but they have no regulations in place to stop investments in companies that are registered in tax havens.
For example Malawi Mangos and there's plenty of others.
But that's correct.
I mean that is really low hanging fruit Matt.
Like it's one thing having investments which don't find a big social return.
But the idea that oh we're going to help Malawi by helping a company registered in Mauritius which doesn't even pay tax to Malawi.
It's mad.
Like the United States government is very good on businesses which make profit in its jurisdiction which basically tax dodges much better than we are in this country by the way.
And yet or even US nationals who live abroad they find them and they get them to pay the money.
But then the whole model of development which is really being pushed by the United States overseas.
I mean heaven forbid the US is being hypocritical of course but this just strikes me as like utterly brazen.
Like how can you have a developmental model which doesn't even involve businesses which you want to grow if you believe in the private sector.
Clearly those businesses should be paying tax to pay for state services.
Clearly.
But that doesn't even seem to be included there.
No.
I mean I can't tell you.
I mean I agree with you.
It's shocking.
But then it's shocking that an aid organization whose stated goal is to alleviate global poverty is investing in a diamond mine in Tanzania.
It makes no sense.
Or a five star hotel or a shopping center in El Salvador or a gated community in El Salvador.
Every country in the world there's these bizarre projects and it goes to the fact that it's an extremist point of view.
Extreme economic ideology that has proven to be a disaster pretty much everywhere it's been practiced because you talk about nationalism.
Right.
And I agree with you that it's often especially in the developing world.
Those kind of economic nationalism is a good thing.
Resource.
I used to work 100% when I worked at the Financial Times.
One of the funniest things about it was whenever any government talked about using the resources for themselves nationalizing a mining company or taxing those corporations high.
It was called resource nationalism and that was a pejorative.
It was seen as oh no that's a bad thing.
You shouldn't be in control of your resources.
And that's how it goes around the world.
In Latin America in the 50s and 60s import substitution model was really successful.
Massive keeping out products so you could develop your infant industries without flooding your own market with foreign goods.
It's good.
It's a good thing and it helped develop domestic economies.
That was completely destroyed in the 70s and 80s by these aid institutions or the Bretton Woods institutions which we're told were about development.
And that's what I think that a realization people need to understand is that the word development is a very different thing if you work within these institutions.
It's not helping the poor develop.
It's greasing the entry of corporate corporations into the developing world.
That is the major role because they believe that's the only way that the developing world can develop.
And it's not coincidence that they believe that.
They believe that because essentially they're promoting an ideology which benefits the richest people in the world.
They were set up by the US and the UK essentially.
I think most people say they're skeptics of sort of trade and aid.
They're skeptics but they'll say look it's a mixed bag.
But from what you're describing you know the existing trade and aid model which we have with the World Bank with the IMF with aid agencies with various NGOs.
It looks like to me a machine to generate inequality.
It's like an algorithm to create as much inequality as possible and you compare that to what's going on for instance in China.
State led hundreds of millions of people brought out of poverty.
Now I'm not saying China is perfect but you've got two quite different paradigms there and it's quite obvious which one works.
Another example of this is I always think what must be amazing working in the World Bank and being an economist
and trying to develop all these theories about how you get out of poverty.
And then looking at Evan Morales' Bolivia that started in 2005.
Their model was to nationalise huge amounts of companies straight away within a hundred days.
They were later praised by the World Bank and IMF for their economic success.
Growth rates, high, massive poverty reduction programme.
That was all done with policies which were the opposite of what the IMF and the World Bank tell you to do.
And it's like you say it's very, very bizarre that people don't look at that and think well maybe we're promoting the wrong policies.
They do the opposite.
They say we'll push it harder when countries come out of the cold.
So for example in Myanmar we went an interesting time because it was a time when they thought democracy was on the path towards democracy.
And obviously Myanmar's been out in the cold for decades.
And we were talking to all these institutions about what policies they were instituting.
And it was all the same ones I've been talking about.
It was signed bilateral investment treaties in Shrine, ISDS.
Sign up for IFC loans to get foreign corporations to enter.
Open an SEZ special economic zone which we went to.
There was one called Tilawa which was being set up actually by the Japanese aid agency.
Because the other point is we should come on special economic zones but they are often funded by aid organisations as well.
Building a special economic zone is our aid money has been used for.
All these things, the menu of policies that the World Bank, IMF, regional development banks push on countries when they come in being reintegrated
are all the ones that show as you say very very little success in developing countries.
And the reason, I mean I don't think it's a conspiracy to say the reason that they hold to these quite extremist ideas that don't benefit the majority
is because they're never meant to.
They're meant to benefit corporate power.
They're meant to benefit the 1%.
That was why they were set up in the first place.
I'll just finish with this.
The person that talks about this quite eloquently is Joseph Stiglitz who was a chief economist at the World Bank for a long time
and he wrote that famous book Globalisation and it's discontent.
Now he's kind of still thinks that there was an idealistic thread and it went wrong.
But if you read about the people that are in control now, he calls them extremists.
They were people that during his time, he saw that they were taking over the levers of power within the World Bank particularly
and pushing an extremist agenda which is still in place and should be got rid of
because the other thing is development sounds boring when you set to people
but what it describes is how the majority of humanity run their economies.
It's extremely important what theories are being promoted because it has a massive impact on billions of people.
It's like you said before, the left, I don't think engage as much as they should on these issues
because these were all issues that exercised the left in the 90s at the end of the Cold War
and particularly you had Seattle, every WTO meeting was there were huge protests
and then that all stopped with September 11th and the drive to war in Iraq.
The left's attention moved away from what was called the anti-globalisation movement
which was a misnomer but it was a big movement globally towards the anti-war movement and the war on terror
and I think that maybe that's dissipating a bit but I think the left needs to re-engage with these issues
because for me having written this book and having looked into this stuff
I think that there's no way you can understand politics today here globally
without seeing it through the lens of corporate power and how they've taken over
and cannibalised the state that created them.
Let's talk about Europe quickly because there's a bank, there's an equivalent to the World Bank,
it's called the European Bank of Reconstruction and Development, the EBRD
and it's funded by European Union member states, i.e. their taxpayers.
So explain to me how Europe's taxpayers, including British taxpayers, helped fund the expansion of Little.
So the EBRD is another interesting institution which was set up at an interesting time,
it was set up in April 1991 at the end of the Cold War
and what it was about was essentially the same as the World Bank,
it was about integrating the World Bank after the Second World War,
it was about integrating Eastern Europe, former Soviet bloc, into the capitalist system
and it was on the principle of the same as the IFC, we all invest in the private sector
which might otherwise not want to go to these new markets.
Now, like with the IFC, it's just become a complete racket and joke.
They've spent a billion dollars giving little money to expand into Eastern Europe.
This is a huge, massively rich corporation, it does not need non-commercial loans
to expand into different places anywhere.
We say we, but again, just to be clear, this is taxpayer money coming from the UK or France,
it's been giving to Little this huge multinational to expand and to make more money.
Yeah, and Little has huge, the other part of this is that a lot of the companies that have invested in
have huge controversies about how they treat workers.
Little particularly in Eastern Europe, we went to Poland and a couple of other places
and talked to workers who worked for Little and they said that their conditions were bad
and that the company was actually uniquely bad in comparison to other ones.
So it's not just, it's aid money that they don't need, taxpayer money to expand that they don't need
and the company itself is particularly and uniquely bad treatment of its workers.
So it makes no sense, sorry to go back to the same point, but it doesn't make sense
if your understanding of aid and development is the one that comes straight from the World Bank.
If you believe that they're telling the truth and that their aim is to alleviate global poverty,
yeah, it doesn't make sense.
If you start looking into it and understanding that that's a lie
and it's about greasing the entry of corporations into new markets
and it's also about enshrining capitalism as a system all over the world,
Eastern Europe, but in Latin America, Africa and Asia, then it makes sense.
Not even capitalism, right? Because as you talk about in the book, Little's growth meant that
smaller retailers, you know, grosses, etc. closed down outdoor food markets,
which by the way were selling produce at a cheaper rate.
So it's not like they were breaking up food cooperatives or something like that.
There was a very different kind.
There was a particular kind of capitalism, I should say, which was being imposed on
Central and Eastern Europe.
And it seems to me that basically the EBRD and the European Union,
the Big Wigs of Brussels and Strasbourg and yes, I sound like Farage, sorry.
Sometimes people disagree with the right about something.
They basically want to European Walmart.
So it's like a status symbol.
We have a single market, so we have to have like across the whole continent,
because we believe in this federal project of like a European Walmart.
Who's going to pay for it? European taxpayer.
Meanwhile, you've got, you know, Little execs making big, big bucks.
And it's insane, Matt.
The idea that expansion is being funded by the taxpayer.
Final question.
She spoke about it earlier and obviously you're very passionate about it,
especially economic zones.
Where do these fit?
We associate them with China, but clearly they're quite integrated with trade and aid.
Yeah, I mean, it's all part of the same menu of policy prescriptions,
which is offered by the World Bank.
Yeah, this was my most interesting part of the book for me personally to report,
because I just think it's kind of a parable for the whole story.
Because what I'll just explain what a special economic zone is.
A special economic zone is a territory which is chiseled off from the national territory in terms of tax regime,
import, export, tariffs, customs, all that.
All the stuff that a national government imposes on corporations when they work in a country is off.
You know, those laws don't apply.
So we call them in a book, Corporate Utopias, and that's essentially what they were, what they are.
They were created, actually, funnily enough, and this was a really interesting part of the story,
which was the first special economic zone ever, or so-called, was in Shannon in Ireland, in West Ireland,
and we went to Shannon to report it.
And this was a sort of really mercurial entrepreneur called Brendan O'Regan.
He's quite famous in Western Ireland.
He had this idea that Shannon needed to have a new development model off,
because it was a famous airport, and it was an airport that refueled airplanes that were transatlantic flights.
And when technology developed enough that an airplane could go further,
they were basically going to be out of any kind of work.
So he said, well, what we should do is we should create this little zone where corporations could do what they want.
They don't have to pay the tax to the government.
They don't have to do all the import, export duties and customs, and they did it.
And that was in 1956, and it has absolutely exploded.
And as you mentioned, China, it's basically the model which has propelled China to economic superpower status,
and they're quite aware of that.
The funny thing was, when we were in Shannon, the head of the Shannon Chamber of Commerce said that Chinese dignitaries often come.
And Xi Jinping was there, not that long ago.
Yeah, and they said, I think it was Xi.
They said that it was either him or a previous leader made a request when they came that they wanted to stop in the taxi to the hotel when he came to Shannon
on Tully Glass Hill, which is this hill overlooking this.
I've been there.
It's just a nondescript hill overlooking a grey industrial estate in Western Ireland.
And the second most powerful man in the world requested that the taxi could stop on the way to the hotel so he could have a moment of pause for reflection to look at the Shannon economic zone,
especially economic zone, because the Chinese are like, this is where it all began.
But it's become a, as I said, it's gone all over the world, and it's come to Britain.
Two years ago, Rishi Sunak, oh, sorry, it wasn't Rishi Sunak then, but the UK government announced that we're going to have 13 free ports here.
And it's the same special economic zone idea.
Corporations won't have to abide by national laws.
And I think that what you've seen with the development of the special economic zone is more and more pressure to create a global economy and national laws in corporate interest,
because often policies which are trialled in special economic zones are then become national policies.
And in fact, we use the term in the book, special economic world, we're living in a special economic world now.
The race to the bottom means that every, the most successful countries for attracting foreign direct investments are the ones that have bad labor laws, bad environmental regulations,
all the stuff that we think of as the basis of a civilized society, that's what you can't have if you want to attract foreign direct investment.
And as I've said, the World Bank, IMF, that's the only way you can develop is to attract foreign direct investment.
So special economic zones are kind of, for me, the emblematic case.
And I'll just finish with this, that I went to Cambodia.
I think this was probably the most profound reporting trip that I made during the, but I went to Cambodia to report on, from two special economic zones in one in Nong Pen and one in the place called Bavette,
which is on the border with Vietnam.
And actually, they're often built on the borders because of trade.
And Bavette actually, just because everyone's talking about Henry Kissinger at the moment, Bavette was one of the places that he destroyed an operation menu during the Vietnam War.
But I actually, they wouldn't let me in.
And then I snuck it, the one in Bavette, they wouldn't let me in.
And then they snuck in and started interviewing workers within the special economic zone.
And it was an incredible experience because they basically said, like, we can't organize here.
So part of the special economic zone is about warehousing workers.
And they said, if we try and organize, they will sack us or even we might be the victims of physical violence.
And what I was told was that often in places, especially in economic zones in Cambodia, but it happens around the world, is that workers will just erupt in violent outbreaks because they're not allowed to organize in a legitimate way.
There's just constant violence.
They'll start smashing up the machines.
They'll beat up their manager, whatever it is.
And that happened all over Cambodia and the world.
And it really did show me the power of unions and how important they are to a civilized society because most of the unions in Cambodia, even the ones that did operate, were called yellow unions.
They were co-opted by the corporations or the state.
And I did interview some independent unions and they were just working within extremely difficult conditions in terms of repression from the state, repression from the corporations.
But they were winning.
The minimum wage when I was there was being raised.
And it was a kind of amazing experience in the context of all this corporate power and the context of working within special economic zones.
They were winning.
So that was quite a hopeful way to end it.
And I think that we haven't touched on this, but I want to just say it before we end that a major part of this is not just corporations exerting their power.
A major part of this is states exerting power on behalf of corporations because everywhere I went in the world, whether it be peasants in Tanzania,
poor people in Colombia being victimized by paramilitaries, wherever it was, I'd say, OK, well, look,
you're being oppressed by this corporation because you're standing up for your rights.
What's your government doing for you?
And they will say, oh, that'd be silly.
The government works for the corporation.
Every single one.
That's how it works.
The government is not working for the people.
The government is working to help the corporation enforce their rule in that person's country.
And that's a very important conceptual understanding to come to because it's the opposite of what we're told,
which is that the state and the corporation are two adversarial power centers and they duke it out, but they don't.
The corporation has a super national system, which we talked about, which operates above national governments,
but even the national governments themselves have become completely infested with corporate power.
And in some ways, it's very explicit.
For example, in the UK, the Department of Trade and Industry has a whole taxpayer funded body called the Defence and Security Organization,
which is role is to promote arms companies around the world, private arms companies.
We pay for that, mainly BAE systems.
But that's a very explicit bit.
It operates on a much more implicit level across the board as well.
So I think that the left going forward needs to understand that if we don't see the level of power that corporations have accrued
and understand how they're exerting it, then we're going to be fighting the wrong battles because the corporations want us to be talking,
want a certain discourse on the left.
I think the discourse we have now, the culture war is a function of the corporate takeover of our whole discourse in that it's really conducive to corporations just working in the background
and not really talking about them and no one really operating any kind of pressures on them to stop the cannibalization of all our resources.
Corporate friendly identity politics has taken off and I don't think that's a coincidence.
I think it's very conducive to certain interests that we constantly talk about culture war issues.
And that's the left and the right.
And we ignore bigger structural economic issues at our peril.
Matt Kennard, that was a great conversation.
Thank you so much for joining us on Downstream.